                       IUPred3 RELEASE NOTES
                       ====================

IUPred3

by Gabor Erdos, Matyas Pajkos and Zsuzsanna Dosztanyi


IUPred3 is supplied in source code form along with the required data files. The
program is written in python3 and requires the scipy package.

NOTE: IUPred3 is not compatible with python2.x versions!

In order to install scipy:

    pip install scipy

or
    pip3 install scipy

usage: iupred3.py [-h] [-a] [-s SMOOTHING] seqfile iupred_type

positional arguments:
  seqfile               FASTA formatted sequence file
  iupred_type           Analysis type: "long", "short" or "glob"

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -a, --anchor          Enable ANCHOR2 prediction
  -s SMOOTHING, --smoothing SMOOTHING
                        Smoothing type: "no", "medium" or "strong". Default is
                        "medium"

where seqfile is a sequence file, a location of a FASTA formatted sequence file
  
iupred_type is any of the option of

    long
    short
    glob
	
for prediction of long disorder, short disorder ( e.g. missing residues in
X-ray structures) or predicting globular domains.

EXAMPLE RUN: 

python3 iupred3.py P53_HUMAN.seq long


INTERPRETATION OF THE OUTPUT:

In the case of long and short types of disorder the output  gives the
likelihood of disorder for each residue, i.e. it is a value between 0 and 1,
and higher values indicate higher probability of disorder. Residues with values
above 0.5 can be regarded as disordered, and at this cutoff 5% of globular
proteins is expected to be predicted to disordered (false positives).
 
For the prediction type of globular domains it gives the number of globular
domains and list their start and end position in the sequence. This is followed
by the submitted sequence with residues of globular domains indicated by
uppercase letters.

SHORT SUMMARY OF THE METHOD

Intrinsically unstructured/disordered proteins have no single well-defined
tertiary structure in their native, functional state. Our server recognizes
such regions from the amino acid sequence based on the estimated pairwise
energy content. The underlying assumption is that globular proteins make a
large number of interresidue interactions, providing the stabilizing energy to
overcome the entropy loss during folding. In contrast, IUPs have special
sequences that do not have the capacity to form sufficient interresidue
interactions. Taking a set of globular proteins with known structure, we have
developed a simple formalism that allows the estimation of the pairwise
interaction energies of these proteins. It uses a quadratic expression in the
amino acid composition, which takes into account that the contribution of an
amino acid to order/disorder depends not only its own chemical type, but also
on its sequential environment, including its potential interaction partners.
Applying this calculation for IUP sequences, their estimated energies are
clearly shifted towards less favorable energies compared to globular proteins,
enabling the predicion of protein disorder on this ground. 
